[AIP-194] Client-side retries (#270)
googleapis/aip: aip/0194.md

---
aip:
  id: 194
  state: reviewing
  created: 2019-08-16
permalink: /194
redirect_from:
  - /0194
---

> # Retrying for client libraries

Reviewer: This is really for gRPC more than for client libraries.
That said, can we make it as generic as possible? "Retrying errors" would be the ideal title, with the content to match.

Author: Agreed. I'll rephrase this as gRPC specific.

> This document aims to lay out guidance about which requests to retry, and for

Reviewer 2: This paragraph feels a little odd in an AIP. I'd make it more assertive but introductory. *Something* like:

> RPCs sometimes fail. When one does, the client performing the RPC needs to know whether it is safe to retry the operation. When status codes are used consistently across multiple APIs, clients can respond to failures appropriately.

(Probably more than that...) It might be worth us discussing to what extent this AIP is for clients and to what extent it's for API producers. It seems to be mostly about clients at the moment... @lukesneeringer any concerns around that?

Reviewer: Ideally, I would like the audience here to be API producers. The goal here needs to be, "Here is how you should specify automatic retries for your API."

which codes.

> Note: this document often uses the term "CRUD". This acronym stands for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** this document often uses the term "CRUD". This acronym stands for
```

Create, Read (Get, List, etc.), Update, Delete.

## Guidance

> Requests can be categorized as either unary or streaming. A unary request is

Reviewer 2: Possibly italicise unary and streaming?

Possibly change "can be" to "are"?

a single request with a single response. A streaming request involves multiple
pieces of data being sent.

> Unary requests can be further categorized as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unary requests are further categorized as:
```

> - Retryable: requests in which repeated runs would not cause unintended state

Reviewer 3: I think we need to split this: 1 section for defining things, 1 section for saying what should and should not be retried.

Author: Done

  changes. For example: most CRUD RPCs which take a unique identifier are

>   considered retryable (see rationale below in "Idempotency and pragmaticism").

Reviewer 3: Should probably make this a link

Author: Done

- Non-retryable: requests which **should not** be retried. Examples include
  CRUD operations which don't take a unique ID, most SQL operations, and
  operations that alter state when retried (for example,
  `IncrementBy(some-uuid, some-field, 7)`, which takes a unique ID but will
  always alter state).

Streaming requests, on the other hand, can be further categorized as:

- Server streaming: requests in which the server streams data to the client.
  These involve no data sent from the client, meaning that it generally is an
  idempotent `GET`. That makes it equivalent to a retryable unary request as far
  as retrying error codes go.
- Client streaming: requests in which the client streams data to the server. The
  retryability of these requests is highly dependent on the type of data being
  streamed. This document does not provide guidance for these requests.
- Bidirectional: requests in which both the client streams to the server, and
  the server streams to the client. The retryability of these requests is
  highly dependent on the type of data being streamed. This document does not
  provide guidance for these requests.

### Retryable codes

> These codes **should** be retried for retryable requests:

Reviewer: We should mention the HTTP equivalents (500 and 503) here.

> These codes **should** be retried for retryable requests:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following codes **should** be retried for retryable requests:
```

Reviewer: +1

Author: Done

- `INTERNAL`: This generally means that some internal part of the system has
failed. These are retryable under the expectation that the system will recover
from failures.
- `UNAVAILABLE`: These codes generally result from network hiccups, and are
generally transient. They are retryable under the expectation that the
connection will become available (soon).

### Non-retryable codes

> These codes **should** never be retried for any request:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These codes **must not** be retried for any request:
```

> - `OK`: The request succeeded.

Reviewer 3: This might be better as a markdown table (if that's supported?)

Reviewer: Markdown tables are supported. I am okay with this as-is, and am also okay with a table.

Author: Done https://github.com/jadekler/aip/blob/194/aip/0194.md

- `CANCELLED`: A user can cancel a request, which **must** be honoured.
- `DEADLINE_EXCEEDED`: A user can set a deadline, which **must** be honoured.
- `INVALID_ARGUMENT`: Retrying a request with an invalid argument will never
  succeed.
- `DATA_LOSS`: This is an unrecoverable error and **must** immediately be
  surfaced to the user.

### Generally non-retryable codes:

> Some codes can be retried if a system is designed without synchronization

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Some codes **may** be retried if a system is designed without synchronization
```

Author: Done

between various components. For example, a system in which a read is designed to
hang forever until a resource is created. However, these are not the types of
systems generally encouraged, and a client **should not** retry these types of
errors.

These codes generally **should not** be retried for any request:

- `RESOURCE_EXHAUSTED`: This may be a signal that the user's quota is exhausted.
  Retries therefore may not be expected to work for several hours; meanwhile the
  retries may have billing implications. If `RESOURCE_EXHAUSTED` is used for
  other reasons than quota and the expected time for the resource to become
  available is much shorter, it may be retryable.

> - `NOT_FOUND`: The resource may be created in the future.

Reviewer 2: It's not clear what these "X may happen in the future" statements are intended to achieve. Are they justifications for not retrying in general? Or suggestions about when they might be retryable in special cases?

Reviewer: Generally concur. I think what we are trying to communicate here is that the state is _not_ likely to be different if you try again. If something returns `NOT_FOUND` and you retry it, it probably still will not be found.

Author: Done

Author: See https://github.com/jadekler/aip/blob/194/aip/0194.md

- `ALREADY_EXISTS`: The resource may be deleted in the future.
- `PERMISSION_DENIED`: The user may be authenticated in the future.
- `FAILED_PRECONDITION`: The system state may change in the future.
- `OUT_OF_RANGE`: The range may be extended in the future.
- `UNIMPLEMENTED`: The RPC may be implemented in the future.
- `UNKNOWN`: `UNKNOWN` and `INTERNAL` are both generic error codes - they are
  errors that may be generated from a wide breadth of causes. Known services
  within the system **should** generate `INTERNAL` errors when the error doesn't
  fit any other code. `UNKNOWN` errors are reserved for truly
  unknown-to-the-system errors, and therefore **should** immediately surfaced to
  the user.

## Appendix

### Idempotency and pragmaticism

A common concern with retrying `CREATE` and `DELETE` operations is that they are
non-idempotent operations. The functional concern can be summarized with this
example:

```
Get("Foo")
> NOT_FOUND
Create("Foo") // Let's work under the assumption that this should be retried.
// ----> UNAVAILABLE
// ----> Create("Foo") # retry #1

> // ----> UNAVAILABLE   # actually, the request succeeded, but the connection died during the response

Reviewer: Break this onto two lines, breaking at column <= 79.

// ----> Create("Foo") # retry #2
// ----> ALREADY_EXISTS
> ALREADY_EXISTS
```

Here, an unexpected result - `ALREADY_EXISTS` - is returned from a Create. The
resource didn't exist before the call was initiated, so the user may wonder,
"How did I receive this result?".

Does this unexpected result make the call non-idempotent?

> The definition of idempotency is unfortunately vague in this regard. [Oxford

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure this is helpful - after all, it's *a* definition, but there could be multiple definitions, some of which are less vague.

Author: Acknowledged, but I think that a definition is better than no definition. It's an attempt at starting at a reasonable foundation before continuing with rationale.

I could rephrase this to, "One definition of idempotency is [...]". Would that work, do you think?

Reviewer: Considering that AIPs are specs, we can _stipulate_ what our definition of idempotency is for the purpose of this document.

dictionary defines idempotent as](https://www.lexico.com/en/definition/idempotent),

> denoting an element of a set which is unchanged in value when multiplied or
> otherwise operated on by itself.

One interpretation of this definition is that an operation is idempotent if
repeating the operation results in the same _response_.

This definition allows for retrying `READ` and `UPDATE` requests, since

> repeated runs always result in the same state and response code. However, this

Reviewer 2: Not if an external actor changes the resource. We'd need to make the definition clearer to make this work - I'm not sure whether it's worth it.

definition precludes retrying `CREATE` calls, since `ALREADY_EXISTS` may be
returned unexpectedly (as in the above example). It also precludes retrying
`DELETE` calls, since `NOT_FOUND` may be returned unexpectedly.

Another intepretation of this definition is that an operation is idempotent if
repeating the operation results in the same _state_ (or, value).

This second definition allows for retrying all CRUD operations, since the
interpretation is only concerned with state, and repeating any CRUD operation
always results in the same state.

> This document's retryability guidances follows the latter interpretation,

Reviewer: Worth noting: I still disagree with this, and I think @jgeewax does too.

There are some other problem cases also. Let's take a modification of your example with _two_ actors:
```
> Get("Foo")
< NOT_FOUND

# Actor A
> Create("Foo")
< UNAVAILABLE  # it actually did not work

# Actor B
> Create("Foo")
< OK

# Actor A
> Create("Foo")  # retry 1
< ALREADY_EXISTS   # correct! and not A's.
```

That is semantically different in an important way. To put the difference in perspective, let's say than an API implements the [AIP-154](https://aip.dev/154) `request_id` pattern -- users get _different_ results in these two cases. In your example, the user gets the resource. In my example, the user gets `ALREADY_EXISTS` because they lost the race.

Author: I'm having trouble parsing this.

>  In your example, the user gets the resource. In my example, the user gets ALREADY_EXISTS because they lost the race.

Is "user" Actor A?

>  To put the difference in perspective, let's say than an API implements the AIP-154 request_id pattern -- users get different results in these two cases. 

What are "these two cases"? Who is "users" - actor A or B?

--------------

The only difference in your example between actor A retrying the request and or not is whether it would have had to have an `ALREADY_EXISTS` if statement after the Create call. There is no downside to the user adding such a check.

Furthermore, if request_id is not implemented, in your example _both actors_ already need such a check (since there's a race between them). I've described this situation in the asynchrony fallacy section below. (Sidenote: request_id might negate the need for this? Haven't read closely enough. Still, there's no downside to having the check.)

which allows for retrying all CRUD operations. The reason for this is that
there's much more value for users to retry more operations, with little downside.

Consider the downside to retrying the `CREATE` and `DELETE` operations. For
users it generally just results in an extra code check:

```

> resp, err := client.Create("Foo)

Reviewer 2: Missing the closing quote

Reviewer: ```suggestion
resp, err := client.Create("Foo")
```

if err != nil {
  if status.Convert(err).Code() == codes.ALREADY_EXISTS { // <- extra code check
    // It already exists.

>     resp = client.Get("Foo")

Reviewer 2: Hmm... depending on the application logic, there could be a much more detailed check here. Maybe the foo that's been created is a very different one, created by a separate process, and this really does mean "the create I tried to do failed".

Author: That case is covered tangentially in the asynchrony fallacy section below. (such a user should not be performing retries at all)

  } else {
    // An actual error.
    panic(err)
  }
}
_ = resp // TODO: Use resp.
```

The above code is quite natural and exists in many codebases already: it is the
easy answer to asynchrony within a system, and a cheaper/more performant way
of writing code that doesn't know about state (the alternative is to always
perform a `READ` before a `CREATE`/`DELETE`, which is superfluous).

In comparison to the relatively small downside, there is a large advantage.
Users will _almost always_ retry `INTERNAL` and `UNAVAILABLE`. By building it
into a client library instead, users are saved from implementing retry loops,
deadlines, exponential backoff, and jitter.

Finally, consider that most users _will have to write the if statement either
way_. After all, a user who implements retry logic themselves will _still_ run
into the same problem (and solution) described above.

> #### Absolute correctness

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Absolute correctness
```

(We do not use `h4`.)

There is an argument that some user may need to be absolutely sure of the
state of a system before retrying a non-`GET` request. Such a user is an
argument in favour of only retrying `GET` requests; never retrying `UPDATE`,
`CREATE`, or `DELETE`. However, this set of users likely has very niche
requirements, and is dwarfed by the set of users for whom retrying is

> advantageous.

Reviewer: This paragraph is an assumption, and it is not at all clear to me that it is a correct one.

- I intuitively disagree that retries that end in false errors are advantageous over not retrying.
- I intuitively disagree that the edge cases -- which become virtually impossible to debug or reason about -- are unimportant, or that an opt-out (which the user has no reason to find) is a sufficient remedy.

Furthermore, this paragraph fails the "you can always add and can not always remove" test. In other words, if my intuition turns out to be wrong, but we adopt it, we can update our guidance. The same is not true in the other direction.

In other words -- we are both guessing, but my guess is safer.

Therefore, absent contrary data, I assert that a tie should go to the position of not retrying these methods unless a `request_id` parameter is present. Additionally, we should steer APIs toward adopting AIP-154.

Author: > I intuitively disagree that retries that end in false errors are advantageous over not retrying.

Please describe your reasoning. I can't have a rationale discussion about abstract intuition. :)

> I intuitively disagree that the edge cases -- which become virtually impossible to debug or reason about -- are unimportant, or that an opt-out (which the user has no reason to find) is a sufficient remedy.

Ditto.

> In other words -- we are both guessing, but my guess is safer.

What is your definition of safe? Everything I've described has no negative result to user's state.

> Therefore, absent contrary data, I assert that a tie should go to the position of not retrying these methods

Your reasoning does not take into account "good defaults" or "customer happiness". I think the "safer" things is to provide good, reasonable defaults, where the definition of safety is "customer won't be tempted to use a different cloud": if using our cloud means writing a bunch of needless boilerplate whereas another cloud is Easy and Enjoyable, this becomes a point in favour of not using GCP.

Reviewer: > I intuitively disagree that retries that end in false errors are advantageous over not retrying.

...because you are essentially serving the user a success disguised as an error, and with no clear debugging strategy. The user does not understand _why_ they got the error, and is unlikely to have written handling logic. `UNAVAILABLE` fundamentally means, "something might have gotten lost here, and you should go check it out".

This discussion is actually starting to mirror the discussion in #68 in a lot of ways, so it might be worth reading the discussion on that bug. What it boils down to is -- when something is unavailable, there is a fundamentally unknown state, and it is safer to say "we are in an unknown state, you need to look into it" than guessing.

> I intuitively disagree that the edge cases -- which become virtually impossible to debug or reason about -- are unimportant, or that an opt-out (which the user has no reason to find) is a sufficient remedy.

Lots of reasons here:

1. The two-actor situation could present a security vulnerability.
2. As described above, even the one-actor situation is really confusing.
3. The user has no reason to know that he or she was opted in, so has no reason to opt out until after the bad thing™ has already happened (which might involve data loss).

> What is your definition of safe? Everything I've described has no negative result to user's state.

But several of the situations I have described do.

> Your reasoning does not take into account "good defaults" or "customer happiness". I think the "safer" things is to provide good, reasonable defaults, where the definition of safety is "customer won't be tempted to use a different cloud": if using our cloud means writing a bunch of needless boilerplate whereas another cloud is Easy and Enjoyable, this becomes a point in favour of not using GCP.

It does take into account both good defaults and customer happiness. In the case of good defaults, I dispute what the good defaults are. In the case of customer happiness, which call would you rather take? The one of "why did I have to write this code to handle a 503 that you could have written for me?", or "why did you blow away my data?"

I understand that the ratio of those calls is not 1:1, but the latter is much, much more severe.

Author: > The two-actor situation could present a security vulnerability.
> As described above, even the one-actor situation is really confusing.

You're alluding to situations I've not heard of and you've not described. Would you mind linking me to their descriptions, or writing about them?

> UNAVAILABLE fundamentally means, "something might have gotten lost here, and you should go check it out".

I disagree. It means the request or the response was interrupted by a lack of connection. If we're talking about interpretations, I would say that a _much_ more prevalent interpretation is "retry me" - this is how LSTM, gRPC, most of Google backend service owners, and most of our customers tend to interpret it.

> [user] has no reason to opt out until after the bad thing™ has already happened (which might involve data loss).

>  "why did you blow away my data?"

It seems as though you are primarily concerned with unexpected state changes (data loss via a deletion, etc). Could you describe to me a situation in which that could happen for a retryable RPC as described by this document?

This document does very specifically state that an RPC in which unexpected state changes could happen as a result of retrying _should not_ be classified retryable.

Reviewer: > > The two-actor situation could present a security vulnerability.
> > As described above, even the one-actor situation is really confusing.
> 
> You're alluding to situations I've not heard of and you've not described. Would you mind linking me to their descriptions, or writing about them?

I described it here: https://github.com/googleapis/aip/pull/270#discussion_r320844578

> I disagree. It means the request or the response was interrupted by a lack of connection. If we're talking about interpretations, I would say that a _much_ more prevalent interpretation is "retry me" - this is how LSTM, gRPC, most of Google backend service owners, and most of our customers tend to interpret it.

Right, but the gRPC team has said it is unsafe, as have several API producers (Storage, for example). I really wish it was the case that it was safe because I fundamentally agree with you that users would like it to be automatically retried.

Author: > I described it here: #270 (comment)

Thanks. Continuing that thread there.

> Right, but the gRPC team has said it is unsafe

They have said it is unsafe for operations which modify state. They are thumbs up on retrying requests which do not modify state. This document very specifically makes this distinction.

> A simple answer exists to support this set of users: provide an opt-out for

Reviewer 2: This sounds more like a design doc than an AIP, to be honest. AIPs are primarily around guidance rather than very detailed justification with multiple "but what about" sections. Maybe this AIP deserves to be an exception to that; Luke can provide more of a steer.

Reviewer: Yeah, this section is starting to rathole a bit. This should be part of the _debate around_ the AIP, and can be captured in the PR. That said, we need to have this debate and have it in writing, so keeping this here while we debate it makes sense.

Author: I think that anyone reading this document is going to have Strong Opinions and will want to see this reasoning. Is there an appropriate way we can link to it, or something like that?

Reviewer: Yeah, we can figure that out. That has been requested in the past on a couple of the others, and we probably do want to have some sort of "here is the debate".

We might borrow a page from Wikipedia here; they have the "talk page" for each Wikipedia article; we might have the "design debate page" for the more contentious questions where we document the decision and why we made it. (e.g. aip.dev/194/debate)

We can figure out how to do this once we get to a consensus on the decision. (It will likely involve me just taking some of @jadeckler's prose and copy-pasting to another file with a bit of added infra.)

Thread2: Get("Foo")
Thread2: > NOT_FOUND
Thread1: Create("Foo") // Let's work under the assumption that this should be retried.
Thread1: // ----> UNAVAILABLE
Thread2: Create("Foo")
Thread2: // ----> OK
Thread1: // ----> Create("Foo") # retry #1
Thread1: // ----> ALREADY_EXISTS
Thread1: > ALREADY_EXISTS
```

Here, a system has two threads that convince themselves that "Foo" does not
exist, and then try to create it. Because Thread1 retried the first failed
Create request, it unexpectedly returned `ALREADY_EXISTS`.

However, it is easy to see that _one of_ these requests would have to receive
`ALREADY_EXISTS`, even without retries. So, the problem here is not retrying:
the problem is that there is no synchronization between two components of the
system that are both concerned with the same resource. Removing the retry logic
would not solve the problem.

There are several solutions to this problem that do not involve retrying:

- Run these requests in a read-write transaction, ensuring atomicity.
- Make the two components in the system synchronous.
- Add a piece of code that considers `ALREADY_EXISTS` a success case (as above
  described in "Idempotency and pragmatism").

> 

Reviewer: Add a `## Further reading` section that points to AIP-154, and add a further reading section to that AIP that points here.

Author: Done

> ## Changelog

Reviewer: We have not really done changelogs until after an AIP hits reviewing, so no need for one here.

Author: Done

---
aip:
  id: 194
  state: reviewing
  created: 2019-08-16
permalink: /194
redirect_from:
  - /0194
---

# Retries for gRPC clients

RPCs sometimes fail. When one does, the client performing the RPC needs to know
whether it is safe to retry the operation. When status codes are used
consistently across multiple APIs, clients can respond to failures
appropriately.

## Guidance

Clients **should** retry requests for which repeated runs would not cause
unintended state changes, which are non-transactional, and which are either
unary or server streaming.

Clients **should not** retry transactional requests; instead these requests
**should** have user-level retry logic that retries the entire transaction
block from the start.

Clients **should not** retry requests in which repeated runs would cause
unintended state changes.

**Note:** This AIP does not cover client streaming or bi-directional streaming.

### Retryable codes

The following codes **should** be retried for retryable requests:

| Code | Discussion |
|--|--|

> | `INTERNAL` | This generally means that some internal part of the system has failed. These are retryable under the expectation that the system will recover from failures. |

Reviewer 2: The "generally" bits here are quite worrying. For example, if an operation that would debit my bank account fails with internal or unavailable, I want to know *for sure* that it's not happened before I retry it.

If we have anything more concrete we can say to give us confidence in retrying here, that would be nice to see.

Author: Fixed (both "generally" cases (UNKNOWN, INTERNAL) are now marked "do not retry".

| `UNAVAILABLE` | These codes generally result from network hiccups, and are generally transient. They are retryable under the expectation that the connection will become available (soon). |

## Appendix

### Non-retryable codes

The following codes **should not** be retried for any request:

| Code                | Discussion                                                                       |
|---------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `OK`                | The request succeeded.                                                           |

> | `CANCELLED`         | A user can cancel a request, which **must** be honoured.                         |

Reviewer: Use "honored" rather than "honoured" (throughout).

Author: Done

| `DEADLINE_EXCEEDED` | A user can set a deadline, which **must** be honored.                            |
| `INVALID_ARGUMENT`  | Retrying a request with an invalid argument will never succeed.                  |
| `DATA_LOSS`         | This is an unrecoverable error and **must** immediately be surfaced to the user. |

### Generally non-retryable codes:

The following codes generally **should not** be retried for any request:

| Code  | Discussion  |
|--|--|

> | `RESOURCE_EXHAUSTED` | This may be a signal that the user's quota is exhausted. Retries therefore may not be expected to work for several hours; meanwhile the retries may have billing implications. If `RESOURCE_EXHAUSTED` is used for other reasons than quota and the expected time for the resource to become available is much shorter, it may be retryable. |

Reviewer 2: We may wish to add something around a machine-readable status that indicates the nature of the exhausted resource, and when it will become available again. That would definitely be nice to have - but unless we've got something concrete, it possibly makes sense to leave it out. (I'd sort of like "this is reasonable, but not specified yet - we're aware of it" somehow.)

Author: +1. I unfortunately don't have any concrete for that, though.

---
aip:
  id: 194
  state: reviewing
  created: 2019-08-16
permalink: /194
redirect_from:
  - /0194
---

# Retries for gRPC clients

RPCs sometimes fail. When one does, the client performing the RPC needs to know
whether it is safe to retry the operation. When status codes are used
consistently across multiple APIs, clients can respond to failures
appropriately.

## Guidance

Clients **should** retry requests for which repeated runs would not cause
unintended state changes, which are non-transactional, and which are either
unary or server streaming.

Clients **should not** retry transactional requests; instead these requests
**should** have user-level retry logic that retries the entire transaction
block from the start.

Clients **should not** retry requests in which repeated runs would cause
unintended state changes.

**Note:** This AIP does not cover client streaming or bi-directional streaming.

### Retryable codes

The following codes **should** be retried for retryable requests:

> | Code | Discussion |

Reviewer: Could we change back to lists? This ended up not looking as good as I hoped in GitHub Pages, and the Markdown also looks bad.

Author: Done

---
aip:
  id: 194
  state: reviewing
  created: 2019-08-16
permalink: /194
redirect_from:
  - /0194
---

# Client-side retries

> This document aims to lay out guidance about which requests to retry, and for

Reviewer: This paragraph still feels a bit odd. Can we change it to @jskeet's suggestion:

> RPCs sometimes fail. When one does, the client performing the RPC needs to know whether it is safe to retry the operation. When status codes are used consistently across multiple APIs, clients can respond to failures appropriately.

Author: Done

which error codes.

## Guidance

Clients **should** retry requests for which repeated runs would not cause
unintended state changes, which are non-transactional, and which are either
unary or server streaming.

Clients **should not** retry transactional requests; instead these requests
**should** have user-level retry logic that retries the entire transaction
block from the start.

Clients **should not** retry requests in which repeated runs would cause

> unintended state changes.

Reviewer: How do we treat billing here? If I retry a request to video intelligence, for example, that might be expensive, but the request is otherwise idempotent.

We may not have to decide this. My gut instinct is that requests that cost extremely little (which is most of them) are fine to retry, but I would want to be a bit careful if the request was expensive.

Author: I think that for the things we are recommending retry - INTERNAL and UNAVAILABLE - there is an argument that no billing should occur. But, you're right, it's a good axis to think about. I'll take your easy-out of not dealing with it here, and let's see if it comes up during review with the individual service owners.

> This document does not cover client streaming and bidirectional streaming

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** This AIP does not cover client streaming and bi-directional streaming
```

Author: Done

- `RESOURCE_EXHAUSTED`: This may be a signal that the user's quota is exhausted.
  Retries therefore may not be expected to work for several hours; meanwhile the
  retries may have billing implications. If `RESOURCE_EXHAUSTED` is used for
  other reasons than quota and the expected time for the resource to become
  available is much shorter, it may be retryable.
- `NOT_FOUND`: The resource may be created in the future.
- `ALREADY_EXISTS`: The resource may be deleted in the future.
- `PERMISSION_DENIED`: The user may be authenticated in the future.
- `FAILED_PRECONDITION`: The system state may change in the future.
- `OUT_OF_RANGE`: The range may be extended in the future.
- `UNIMPLEMENTED`: The RPC may be implemented in the future.
- `UNKNOWN`: `UNKNOWN` and `INTERNAL` are both generic error codes - they are
  errors that may be generated from a wide breadth of causes. Known services
  within the system **should** generate `INTERNAL` errors when the error doesn't
  fit any other code. `UNKNOWN` errors are reserved for truly
  unknown-to-the-system errors, and therefore **should** immediately surfaced to
  the user.

## Further reading

> Also see: [Request Validation](https://aip.dev/154).

Reviewer: This suggestion is just for following the style of other "further reading sections".

```suggestion
- For parallel or retried request disambiguation, see [AIP-154][].

[aip-154]: ./0154.md
```

Author: Done

---
aip:
  id: 194
  state: reviewing
  created: 2019-08-16
permalink: /194
redirect_from:
  - /0194
---

# Retries for gRPC clients

RPCs sometimes fail. When one does, the client performing the RPC needs to know
whether it is safe to retry the operation. When status codes are used
consistently across multiple APIs, clients can respond to failures
appropriately.

## Guidance

Clients **should** retry requests for which repeated runs would not cause
unintended state changes, which are non-transactional, and which are either

> unary or server streaming.

Reviewer 2: Retrying server-streaming code is at least tricky at the moment. I'm not massively averse to keeping it in, but it's worth being aware that very language support it at the moment, IIRC.

Author: Done (removed)

Author: Done
